It's right there, and it's funny.
Why don't you, Father, say for the tape recorder who is speaking now?
Okay.
Father Arsenios of the Monastery of Atopedi on Mount Athos is about to speak about Mount Athos in Greek, and the translator is Father Isidore of the same monastery.
Yes.
And so, he was about to tell me about, Father was about to tell me what produced all this.
Exactly.
I would like to begin from the very beginning of civilizations, when one was living as a hunter, and his motive was to survive.
Then he settled and he began working on the fields.
Then he began creating social groups.
And he began what we call civilization, that is the relationship between men in all kinds of levels.
They had the need in order to exchange merchandise items.
This socialization
began to give beginning for the law and legislations.
And then they organized
let's say different civilization under a leadership.
And so we have the various civilizations like the Egyptian one, the Chaldeans, the Chinese, later on the Islamic, the Byzantine, and what is called also the European also.
which is a development of the Byzantine civilization which has as its origin the classical Greek people as well as the Romans.
I would like more to speak about the Byzantine civilization.
Because of that civilization, most of it is here.
You know, here we have most of it Byzantine.
When the president got here, how do you say most of it that has survived is here, right?
You say most of it is here.
Yes, no, it was a mistake for me.
He said most of what we have here is Byzantine.
Yes, okay.
I mean only he says a small summary regarding all the other civilizations which is a big thing of course to speak about all these things.
But regarding the Byzantine culture.
Sir Stephen Rassiman, an English Byzantineologist.
The Byzantines inherited the fine and delicate Greek sensitivity.
in the arts etc, in the culture generally, as well as the civilization that the Romans developed later on, when the Romans first conquered Greece, and eventually they created the vast Roman Empire,
For a lot of time he says, the Latin language was official language.
The new doctrine of Christianity came from the East and
He was united with the Greek spirit.
As you know, religion and civilization is something which is very much intertwined.
The old civilizations like the Chinese Egyptians and so on, they were actually worshipping the creation and whatever was in it.
So we had innumerable days.
For example, for the sun due to the benefits that he gives to man, they thought that it was a god.
The Incas in America they used to worship the mountains.
Their mind was thus
came upon understanding what's above.
Also in the ancient Greece we can also see that they had also the same ideas about the deities.
But we had some very special people in Greece which they gave a different direction regarding metaphysics like Socrates and Plato who developed and transmitted his speech.
He and Plato were talking about one God
They believed that there was a pre-existence of matter.
Matter was always there.
And God is the idea of all goodness.
Matter.
I'm sorry.
I just want to make sure when I listen to it.
And so people, so how they used to say, should cultivate
They are good things they have within them in order to be like God who is all good.
And he was talking also about the four important virtues of man.
One is called prudence.
That's prudence, sofrosini.
Fronissi means... Fronissi is... Fronissi is... Fronissi is prudence, wisdom.
Fronissi has to deal with the purity of the body.
Fronissi.
Okay, the other way.
Throneously is prudence or wisdom, whereas sofrosini is the purity of the body, of the senses, of the mind.
Somebody likes to eat more than he needs.
Or to drink and get drunk.
The virtue of sofroxying to eat as much as he needs.
And never to get drunk.
On the matter of love.
Somebody, a man would like to have a relationship with many women or the reverse, a woman with many men.
But prudence teaches man that there are more spiritual pleasures and they are much more important than the lust.
Now, prudence and wisdom are the same.
Yes, he's using exactly prudence and wisdom in the same context.
A third virtue is to be brave.
Courage.
In order to have the power, using prudence and
in order to be, let's say, a boss of himself, if I may say so.
In control.
In control of himself.
And the fourth one, the last one, is called justice.
The four important virtues of the human soul.
And are these principles of the Orthodox?
He's about to come to that.
It seems that Plato had studied the Old Testament
Only the Jews had a very different religion than all the other nations.
They were talking about one God who created the universe.
In some words in his books, actually in Psalms, I said, ye will become gods, ye are gods.
Whereas King Solomon refers to these four features that we have just said, the way as Plato, later on.
For the Jews, God wasn't the universe.
And that is why they had a strict commandment not to create anything in order to represent deity or deities.
For the Jews God was the mind which conceived the idea of creating the universe and everything in it.
And in everything this God has given ordinances, laws and order.
Since man is an image of God according to the Genesis.
And we see that in the Old Testament it says that man can become like God.
That's another similarity.
Plato also said that man has been created in order to be like God.
That's extraordinary, those similarities.
It's a very substantial difference.
Since God is a mind, and mind he means also spirit, and we are also actually mind, minds, he can have contact revelations between the God mind and the man mind.
No, God since he is the creator, he knows
Very well why he has created all these things.
How he created everything.
Which is the very purpose why he has brought everything into realization.
And man, if he likes, if he prefers, if he chooses.
and he expels a dark place, a dark thing from his heart which says, I know everything, the ego.
It's what it says in the Old Testament descriptions that God goes against those who are proud in heart.
Tote, πίστευαν οι Ιουδαίοι, και το ξέρουμε αυτό από τους προφήτες, ότι ο υπέρτατος νους δημιουργός
And we know through the prophets, the many prophets of the old Israel, that God, the mind, was coming into a union with the mind or spirit of men.
And he was giving them his wisdom, as much as they could understand during their
period of time, their epoch, their era.
Although God was giving them supernatural revelations, yet whatever they were writing or saying was limited to their cultural background
and to the human abilities.
That is why we have King Solomon when he was asked what would you like to be given by God, what would you like to be given?
He asked wisdom.
This is the very first power or virtue of the soul which comes
together with Prudence.
But certainly in this case Solomon didn't just receive wisdom but more than what we say wisdom.
In Plato
He conceived that man should become like God, but he couldn't comprehend, he couldn't grasp that God is a person and can talk to him, convey to him messages.
He thought that it was the idea of good.
But however, his teaching as well as of Aristotle, it was about virtue, on good.
Their spirit was very much cultivated, so they became very noble men.
So when Christ appeared, of course the Old Testament speaks very openly about the coming of the Messiah.
The Greeks, many of them were very cultivated as characters and it was easy for them since
God became man and was teaching them to grasp his teaching which was of high quality.
Which the teaching of Christ is actually, he says, to imitate his behavior
and his character.
One to imitate Christ, to put it simply.
This is his teaching.
The two main virtues qualities that Christ taught them, one is humbondness, humility, and the other love.
Humbleness fits to man because man is corruptible and he dies.
Man can make many ideas and legends how the world may have come into existence and create dailies and things like that.
but the one who says let me not try to find the solutions from my own mind it's better to say let me humble my spirit and say I know nothing and let me ask from God through prayer to tell me
What is truth?
This is what Abraham did.
Whose father was an idolater.
And yet, although he was coming from idolaters, through revelation, due to his humbleness, he came into conduct and known
And he knew the real God.
And he became the father of the nation that God loved and protected especially.
And for him Christ came, Asimaran.
But when Christ revealed himself, the people who was in the best readiness
To understand him was the Greek one.
Because their spirit was already cultivated, developed on the ideas of virtues, of good.
The finest language which could convey high meanings and deep meanings was and is always, he says, the Greek one.
It has a lot of potentialities in expression.
Potentialities.
To convey many messages in many ways and in deep ways.
So when Christianity was spread in Greece, through the apostles,
And if one reads the life of Christ and especially the Acts of the Apostles, the teaching about Christ was regarding humbleness and love, but it was
ended to the union with the third person of the Trinity, the Holy Spirit.
So for those people who were good and they had good inclination towards goodness, they had the gift to use
the grace, the energy of the Holy Spirit.
That is why they were always saying that the miracles that we are doing are not by us, but by the Holy Spirit.
In the name of Jesus Christ.
Christ is the truth.
And the truth is not an idea.
Because see we have thousands of ideas.
And one collides to the other.
And so what is truth?
So truth is a person.
And the only person who could be absolutely true is God.
For this reason, the Orthodox Christianity was based on the imitation of Christ which is really the truth.
That is why Saint Paul used to say
be imitators of me because I imitate Christ.
That is all of us, we have to become imitators of Paul, that is imitators of Christ.
This is basically the rationale that leads to the production of these extraordinary artworks and manuscripts and books.
Is this what we're saying?
I'm sensing that this is what we're...
This is what he is leading us.
It was very natural.
Since God is a creator and creates, and man is an image of God, thus he has the potentialities to create also.
To create, it is something of his own substance.
It is something which is coming out of him.
This is excellent.
This is what I was looking for.
The most basic cause of man's attitude towards creating.
Because he wants to be wise as God is wise and of course be very wisdom.
And because God is love and he's creating out of love.
And man also wants to do, to create out of love, as God is doing the same thing.
But here we have a problem.
Evil.
Many Oriental religions, Asiatic, they believe that evil is a deity.
But Christ has taught us that evil has no substance at all, does not exist.
The evilness is created when human mind will give birth to conceive something evil and instead of expelling this out, he realizes it.
evil was a deity then that would mean that all of us when we conceive an evil thought another deity stronger than us should force us to do evil.
But we see that not all people are bandits or thieves and not all are killers,
That means the conclusion is that some men have chosen to follow evilness.
Now when Christianity was spread throughout the Roman Empire,
Many groups of people couldn't grasp, couldn't understand the messages of Christ.
This is because they never asked from God
to have a revelation from above, but they were trying to understand the gospel according to their own mind framework.
In 330 when the capital of the Roman Empire was transmitted from Rome to Byzantium,
And Constantine was the very first emperor who accepted Christianity and the persecution stopped.
Then the Greek people had the chance and the Greek spirit had also the opportunity to create
extraordinary civilization, as it had happened in the golden days, in the classical Athens, the classical Greece, which of course was a period of paganism.
Paganism, he means, it means adoration, worship of men, for men and martyrs.
Now,
Now the Greek spirit can worship the true God.
So all this art that they produced is, he uses the word hyperbatical which means... It's something which goes to the supernatural, it attires to the supernatural.
What was the word he used?
We have to open up a dictionary.
I'll get it with a big dictionary.
We'll have it.
This art now is dealing very much with the person with the personality.
And especially with those that managed
to become like God.
Those who have maintained that, attained that, these are what we call saints.
The Greek word Agios, it's from a word which means alpha, which means somebody who has nothing evil within him.
And it is a commandment by God that all of us should be good because also in God there is no bad, no evil.
So the whole Byzantine art is dealing with the personality and the person of Christ, his mother, the saints,
and broadens to many kinds of arts.
For example, the transmission of the word of God was very important through books.
And although now the Greeks were worshipping God in this supernatural way,
Steven Ransimann, who is an expert in this civilization, but also we still live within this very civilization, we can see that this civilization has preserved whatever art, knowledge, etc was before Christ,
astronomy, geography, history, mathematics, all these arts and sciences were taught in the Byzantine Empire.
But it was very natural that the arts and senses were very much oriented towards the worship of God the way it was revealed to them.
in the Byzantine period they became much more noble than they used to be during the Roman times.
For example he says the Incas they were making human sacrifices.
Romans were throwing people into the lions.
But in the Byzantine civilization we have no more things like that.
The nobleness, the gentleness of man during the Byzantine period mounted at its peak.
And even if we have a new Byzantine
As we say regarding the classical art, we cannot have another period of that, but we should try to imitate it.
We say something the same.
We cannot become to gain that perfection that the Byzantilists went up there,
But we're trying our best to be as much as close as we can.
We can obtain the brilliance, the level of accomplishment?
Yes, they have, exactly, exactly.
But we can try to be as close as we can.
So do we still do art?
There were still artists working and... In Greece we have a new wave which is looking through and for this civilization.
For us it is easier to find it because there are places
in which this is preserved.
For example, the monasteries libraries.
The art, the painting in the main, the big churches of the monasteries.
The Byzantine icons.
The Byzantine manuscripts.
All these are preserved here in Greece.
And here especially on Mount Athos we have the worship and the life that the people used to have during the Byzantine times.
This is the most important thing of all he says.
Here he says something very extraordinary.
in a remote and small corner of the Earth, we have Byzantium continuing through the years.
Yes, that's so important.
No, we have to leave.
That's excellent.
He said it.